this is one of the things that
distinguished communism from nazism
let's say and made it even maybe more
pernicious
the nazis basically said the world
that's for the aryans and the rest of
you can go to hell and we'll be happy to
aid in the
flames let's say there's not a
universalism associated with that
there's a definite exclusion and it's
pretty bloody obvious on the communist
front though and this is maybe what made
it such a powerful substitute in some
sense for for christianity there was the
notion that what we were working for was
the universal brotherhood of man and
this intense inclusiveness where
everyone could live together peacefully
and so people were also led down the
garden path by that presumption and
found out that lying in the service of
future utopia turns out to be a pathway
to hell just like lying in the service
of an exclusionary fascist state